We're talking to Christophe.
How do you pronounce your name?
Christophe, I'm sure.
Since I came to the States, it's sort of...
It's been modified, and now most people say something like longshore or something, and I've gotten used to it.
And so how long have you been in the United States?
Oh, it's been since 1993, 1994, basically.
And you're from Germany, I assume, is that correct?
Yeah, yeah.
a specialty in Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
Oh, I didn't.
Actually, that's not what I started out doing.
My expertise is actually in 19th century nature writing, really.
Originally it was actually modernist poetry.
I wrote a book about William Curtis Williams.
He really had the power.
Then my next book was about the poetics of natural history, because I like books, and that's essentially where my passion is.
So how does a monograph on the modernists bring you to Longfellow, might I ask?
Really, I wasn't interested in Longfellow at that point at all.
And where are we in terms of time when you say that point?
Late 80s, 1991.
That was a while ago.
Yeah, that was a while ago.
I knew that Pound was distantly related to Longfellow and this famous story that Grace reports about Longfellow.
pound, you know, suffering from the shame of being related to Longfellow.
How arrogant can you get, really?
Yeah.
Well, did that kind of attract you to taking a look at Longfellow?
No.
No, what really happened is I was working, I spent most of the 90s really working on John James Audubon and related things, and I
My book was about Bartram, Audubon, and a couple of other nature writers.
And really, with the love of books, they got me to do that.
And Audubon, of course, the pinnacle of, you know, fine bookmaking.
And I did a lot of work in Houghton.
And I knew that Longfellow was interested in Audubon.
simply because, not because he thought he was a great writer, but because he needed some material for Evangeline as he was working on, you know, writing about a landscape he'd never seen.
And he thought Audubon was a wretched writer, but still, if you read Evangeline very closely, you find lots of echoes of Audubon, some of them directly, the hummingbirds flitting, hummingbirds flitting and so on, the stuff that he got from...
Audubon.
But even at that point, I wasn't yet interested in Longfellow.
There were two factors that really kind of came together.
I came across just by chance a box of little drawings in Houghton Library done by, as the catalog said, Charlie Appleton Longfellow, which was not correct.
They were done by Longfellow himself, and then, of course, Daniel Aaron, who was my mentor at the time, had written on Longfellow, and very compellingly so.
There's a very good essay by him, which came out in a very...
inaccessible location, the Portland Historical Society magazine.
Is this something that I can find, by the way, the Aaron piece?
Probably not.
They used to have a little reprint at the...
Well, you could find it at Harvard, of course.
Yeah, the Athenaeum must have it, too.
Yeah, it's cited in my book in the bibliography.
Oh, no, I actually saw the citations.
So you will be able to find it at the Athenaeum, I'm sure.
If not, I actually have an extra copy of it.
Well, let me see.
I have about ten titles that I'm going in to get at the Athenaeum.
Which is a really remarkable piece in many, many ways.
And then there is a...
An introduction he did to the Everyman edition of Hiawatha, as long as I would like to have it pronounced.
Hiawatha.
Hiawatha, yeah.
Not Hiawatha.
No, no.
Which is always a dilemma, you know, when you talk about it publicly.
You need to decide what you're going to say.
If you say Hiawatha, you sound affected.
Is it like Elizabethan or Elizabethan, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I usually trip myself up and switch between... So what do you say, he or wasa?
Well, I say both, really, and that doesn't make me look so good publicly, really.
Unfortunately, but... No, I think it's great, actually.
It always happens.
Well, I mean, it's an authorial decision there.
Yeah, I know, I know.
And he did an introduction for the Everyman paperback.
It's a little paperback, which...
It might be out of print now, and it's a terrific introduction.
It's really, really well written, and full of the Aaron-esque kind of irony, tongue-in-cheek way of writing that he has.
So I saw these drawings, and they were remarkable, and I really, really liked them.
I thought it was not something I associated with Longfellow.
And I only knew some of the standard, you know, anthology pieces.
Metzuka Minna I knew and Polarivia Thrive and maybe a couple more.
The Cross of Snell, you know, the pieces you usually find.
And the drawings were just so delightful and so wonderful.
so lightly done that I wanted to know more.
And I talked to Aaron, and Aaron said, you know, there's really something that you should take a look at.
Now, what exactly was he suggesting that you look at his writing?
He was suggesting, well, he was
He wasn't really, I mean, the remarkable thing about having him as a mentor is that Aaron never suggests what he should do.
He just, you know, plants a little mug in your ear and says, look a little more.
He's wonderful, which is why I really wanted to write about him in one of his looks.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, which I haven't wanted to do for about 20 years, by the way, and I said, if I don't do it, I'll never do it.
The best piece of advice anyone has ever given me actually came from him, and it was way post-dissertation.
It was that, you know, I would have needed it much earlier.
I was working on this natural history book, and I gave him a chapter that I wasn't really sure about to read, and I said, you know, I would really like to hear what you think about it, and he said,
Do you like it?
And I said, not really.
Then I don't want to read it yet.
Isn't that wonderful?
You have no idea how such... Of course you do.
That's the best advice he could possibly give you.
If it's going to bore you, don't you think it's going to bore me, basically?
But he would never say it like that.
But he did, in a way.
You know what impresses me?
Were you bringing a European sensibility to the writings of the work of Longfellow?
Yeah.
That's, I think, what happened in mind.
It's kind of refreshing, isn't it, in a way?
Yeah.
Because here's this American who went to Europe and studied all of these languages and traditions and used them to inform this body of work, which we're still trying to figure out what it is or was.
And then you come with this European...
perspective.
Am I following this correctly?
Do I think?
Definitely.
And, of course, passages like the one that, you know, kind of ignited my interest and my passion for him.
I think I cite this in my book, though I don't remember now.
There's a letter in which he writes to Sumner, and he talks about having...
attempted to persuade members of the Harvard faculty to sign a petition for a reduction of overseas postage.
And no one cared about it.
And President Walker even said,
he'd only received, I think, one letter from Europe ever, and he was not hoping to ever get another one.
It also was appalled.
And, you know, for me, of course, this is a resonant passage, and connected also with my sense that, you know, here we are, and this is, of course, my identity as a college professor, too, and we teach Whitman, Emerson, and so on, and we heard the same orthodoxies about, you know, how
the birth of the American identity and so on, you know, basically sort of the ethnomahism idea that this is the Renaissance.
And there are all these people who are also in Cambridge at the same time who are far more informed about global matters, about literature in different languages, than some of the...
you know, canonical figures today are.
And it suddenly occurred to me that, you know, what was kind of iconoclastic in the 1850s, Melville, Whitman, and so on, is basically orthodoxy today.
And it seemed kind of interesting to go back to...
the now marginalized people like Longfellow.
Well, that's a very interesting point.
I don't mean to interrupt, but you say the now marginalized people such as Longfellow.
Because this does kind of, I think...
allow us to enter, you know, what is my concern for this particular piece for Smithsonian is that we approach his bicentennial year.
And my take on it, obviously, as articulated by you in your book, and certainly suggested by your title, although you have a disclaimer there that you are not...
You are not calling for a total re-evaluation of Longfellow.
But it is Longfellow Redux.
And this apparently was our first great, meaning American,
Our first great literary or cultural pop star, hero.
And now I'm 63 years old, and I can tell you that when I went to elementary school and junior high school, I easily was required to memorize no fewer than six Longfellow poems.
Yeah, yeah.
But today, I have two daughters, both in their 20s, and they don't know what the hell I'm talking about.
Well, they might know a list of my children, and usually they were the Midnight Rider Paul Revere, but on the shores of Kitschikumi or something like that.
But this was so extraordinarily pervasive and powerful.
And what happened?
What happened?
So I guess I'm looking at celebrity and how ephemeral the nature of fame and celebrity are.
But it is, I think, just let me finish this, in addition to being a literary phenomenon, it was a cultural phenomenon, I guess.
And so now you can take it from there, I guess.
But that's kind of what I'm trying to... I just wanted to reaffirm what you said.
I just finished about two weeks ago teaching an NEH seminar for high school teachers on Longfellow and Hawthorne.
co-teaching it with somebody at Bowdoin College, and most of the teachers had signed up for our seminar because they wanted to do more Hawthorne, and the Scarlet Letter is one of the most
widely thought text and also Longfellow was unknown to them and several of them actually Longfellow and after the seminar several of them went back and they created an email list and so on so the discussions are in fact ongoing and every day I see a new installment in the debate and
And several of them went back and started talking to their colleagues about Longfellow and how excited they were about some of the things that they discovered.
And some of their colleagues didn't even know who he was.
There was one teacher who sent an email to the list saying that one of her fellow teachers who were a graduate of Morehouse College had never even heard of Longfellow, and he had a master's degree in English.
I've never heard of Longfellow.
That's like being allowed to get a degree in English without having been required to read Shakespeare, it seems to me.
But I also, not to insert another sort of angle into the discussion, but the reason I included that disclaimer in my book is that I also see a chance
you know, in Longfellow to get it away from the discussions of what is a major and what is a minor poet.
I have it right here, right on my list of things to ask you.
Right.
First one, major poet, minor poet.
Yes.
Which is, you know, Newton Arvin gets all tangled up in his book, trying to avoid, on the one hand, to repeat what others had done to Longfellow.
trying to recover what... Now, when you say dentu, could you use the verb inflicted upon him?
Well, people, you know, mathism in the 50s, he said we need to, I think, smash the plaster bus of his long-dead reputation.
Who said this?
F.O.
Mathism.
Really?
Introduction to the...
The second edition of the Oxford Book of American Poetry.
You're kidding.
Yeah.
And, of course, the third edition is just out now.
That's right.
Leland puts six poems in there.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But is that what he says?
Yeah.
Uh-huh.
I'll have to get that then.
It should be.
Yeah, and then the Lewiston quote about the wretched schoolchildren and who got wretched schoolchildren?
Read Longfellow today.
And Arvin wants to sort of be more sophisticated about it, but because he's all tangled up in this minor and major kind of categorization, he doesn't get anywhere, really.
I mean, he stops himself halfway and then says, but for all that, it really isn't a major poem.
And interesting enough...
Even the so-called cultural studies people today who write about Longfield, Eric Harrelson, and a couple of other names come to mind, they cannot move away from that.
Even though they see themselves as in the vanguard of new methodologies and so on, they always have to at some point acknowledge that he's not a great writer.
Let me just interject.
Do you agree with that?
Or do you dispute that?
I think it's a category that, for me, has lost its relevance, really, which is one of the results of working on Longfield.
Several of the poems mean personally a lot to me.
Some of the poems I find very beautiful, others I have to force myself to read.
My standards have never been one of my favorites.
But I've become more...
respectful, I guess, of the work he's been trying to do, breaking down the barriers between taste and appetite, so to speak.
Taste?
Taste and appetite, by which I mean taste is something for refined people, refined readers, cultured people who have the equipment to understand.
And that's a long fellow that we're talking about there, do you think?
Yeah.
But also, I mean, even in his less ambitious work, in his more popular work, you do, there's some, you never forget that he's a learned poet.
And there's always something that you find yourself wondering about, that you find yourself
Having to look up, a simple example is the children's hour where the Bishop of Bingen appears, which had no meaning for most of Longfellow's readers.
It was something that he'd picked up on one of his travels that he knew about because he'd been to Europe, because he was familiar with those stories, because he'd read Robert Sotheby, because he knew more than most people at his time did.
So he never lets you forget.
So is he writing for himself and his circle there, or for the wider readership, do you think?
Well, I think the challenge is that he was combining those things and was indicating that there is something more than consumption.
There is stuff that you need to think about.
inform yourselves about, if not in this poem, maybe next time you pay attention to it.
There's a sort of a little bit of strangeness that he puts into a poem.
You know, that takes you, I'm not saying that
All readers had to go and look up who the Bishop of Bingham was.
But just the fact that this is there in the poem.
And they didn't have Google either.
That's right.
I mean, I could do this right now as we're talking if I choose to.
Yeah.
To find out who the Bishop of Bingham is.
But the point is that this is right there in the poem, and it takes you out of the American context.
And I suggest something to you that is other than the world that you know.
as the poet says in Tales of the Wayside Inn, which is one of my favorite Longfellow works.
And I live, by the way, about 10 miles from the Wayside Inn.
You do?
We actually, my wife and I, got married at the Wayside Inn.
Oh, really?
We were going to marry our daughter there last month.
No, we did.
And this was before my interest in Longfellow.
The reason being, my wife is a violinist who did a lot of, we lived in Boston for a long time, and she
in Cambridge and Somerville, and she did a lot of gigging, and The Way Set In was one of the least expensive sites.
It was a very lovely venue.
It worked out great.
But the poet says in The Taste of the Way Set In, don't think for the literary sunsets in your backyard only.
So, not in your backyard only.
It's something that happens that's the global phenomenon.
And...
And I see the same impulse driving his work as a translator, an attempt to remind readers that this is a translation from a work that's not written in English.
So you put an Italian word right into your translation.
You do make the syntax so that it doesn't sound English, which a lot of people make fun of.
Even today when Matthew Pearl...
edition of the Inferno was reissued.
I think Christopher Benfey, in a review, foreslaved that, you know, what are we supposed to do with those lines?
They don't sound good.
They don't sound English.
Exactly.
Well, did he even try the... Didn't he try the Tessarima rhyme?
I don't think he did, but... No, no, he did not.
He did not.
But he did rhyme the... Yes, he... It was an attempt to use
English verse, that's for sure.
But it was not an exact attempt to replicate Dante because the chapter reminds me that they're like, he has close numbers, like the blossoms on a hawthorn bush.
Something has to be sacrificed in that translation.
But I can still remind my readers that this is not an English text because that's important to me, that you look beyond who you are and what you know.
And when I say breaking down the distinction between taste and appetite, these are poems that are meant to be enjoyed.
They're poems that are meant to be consumed and reproduced, recreated.
At the same time, they also appeal to sort of a higher sense of what culture is supposed to be.
Now, on Longfellow's part?
On Longfellow's part, yes.
And that is a project that I find compelling.
And very, very challenging because it also challenges our own orthodoxies, critical orthodoxies of what literature and the teaching of literature is all about.
English departments have instilled in us in a sense that a poem is good if it's difficult and if you spend a lot of time trying to figure out what exactly it is.
Longfellow is the victim of that kind of... Well, it made him exceedingly popular on the one hand, but demeaned on the other by certainly the modernists in the 20th century.
So coming back to your question, whether he's major or minor, I think these are categories that make no sense.
Well, I'm just picking up a phrase that was in your book.
That's why I wrote it down.
I once saw a description of Allen Ginsberg as a major minor poet.
Yeah.
The theme has been applied to Longfield.
Is that right?
Yeah.
I don't know who it was.
And then there was a review recently in the New York Times of the new edition of the Oxford Book of America.
Poetry.
And he says, let's face it, all American poetry of the 19th century prior to Whitman and Dickinson stinks.
That's the word he uses.
that reviewer.
He basically says, you know, why even fool around with even including some of this stuff in this anthology?
And, you know, so that is the attitude.
Do you agree that that is still the attitude?
I was pleased to see, and one of the great
admirers and indeed fans in print.
That's how I became acquainted with Daniel Aaron of the Library of America.
And they did do a volume six years ago.
J.D.
McClatchy did a wonderful job on it.
But it did take them a hundred volumes before they got to Longfellow.
And the collection actually became quite successful.
My editor of the Library of America, I did the Audubon volume for the Library of America.
I love that book.
I'm sorry.
I apologize for not realizing that you did that.
Well, that's really what I did before I came to Law School.
And what I'm doing again, I'm returning to Audubon for...
A couple of projects.
I love Annie Fields, too, by the way.
I did write about her a little bit in one of my books.
Annie Adams Fields is a great interest of mine.
Is that a publishing interest?
I have a piece coming out in Raritan about her and Henry James in either the next issue or the one thereafter.
So it's just sort of an offshoot and, again, triggered by books because I like these little beacon biographies.
So are you a collector, by the way?
Yes, I am.
In a very, very modest sense because I don't have enough money.
But I like these little beacon biographies that Mark DeWolf Howe did around the turn of the century.
They're very expensive now.
And Annie Fields did a little volume and also.
And they're just beautiful little things.
And just a hundred pages long, I guess, of the format.
Some of them are very, very expensive.
The one on Agassi is currently, I think, it's like $500 or $600 if you want to buy it.
There's only very few.
And that's the only book he ever wrote, actually, in that slide.
So...
But most of my interests are triggered by, you know, either wanting to own a book or seeing it at a library and being fascinated by it.
Well, is it an artifactual thing with you?
I mean, do you enjoy holding?
Is there a tactile?
Yes.
There definitely is.
You know, this is what I write about.
Some of the Longfellow books don't look so great because they're standard Tickner and Field.
They are.
I've got a bunch of them, and you can get them in a pretty good place.
I love the Blue and Cold edition of his poetry and the two volumes of his prose.
I own those, and I've always wanted to own the...
The addition of Hyperion with a photograph by Frith, which is really around $1,000 now, which is not affordable for me.
But definitely something that I would like to have at some point.
Do you have a sense of how he achieved so much celebrity?
What accounts for his extraordinary fame?
He never went out and did lectures as everyone else did.
There was an aloofness to him, and yet an accessibility, as you point out.
At the very beginning, a woman comes to his door.
I think there's sort of a multiplicity of causes.
One of them certainly is that he was very canny about managing his own business.
affairs as a writer.
And he intended to be a professional writer, is that right?
He intended to be a professional writer.
And as soon as he felt he was able to maintain himself, which in fact he was, he resigned from Harvard, which is something most people today would think is something you don't do.
That was pretty good.
Yeah.
And so he was very canny when it came to managing his own rights as an author.
But I think the real reason for success were that he managed, and McClatchy described that very well in a little piece he did for the New York Times Book Review.
Which I have.
That's excellent.
In which he said that, you know, he gave, he came up with stories that
people could relate to.
He was a storyteller.
Exactly.
Remember, these are narrative poems.
He's a narrative poet.
And this is, of course, what also goes against the modernist idea of a poem, that a poem has to be concise and compressed and...
It's difficult to figure out.
Inaccessible.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, Pound was much more of a relative of Longfellow than he realized when he looked at the cantos.
And, you know, there you see the storyteller coming out and really wanting to.
have as much space as he can to expatiate on things.
Have you read all of Pound's cantos?
At one time, yes.
I haven't.
I tried.
I was in English major.
Well, I did.
You know, my dissertation came out of that, so I was kind of forced to do it.
And there are parts of it I enjoy, but other parts, you know, unreadable.
I was teaching it.
I was just curious.
Yeah, yeah.
So as a storyteller, I suppose he just came up with the right things at the right time.
And a poem like Evangelion, you know, this final image of the two lovers buried in the city that is a synonym for American independence.
And with all this other people basically going about their business around them, the hearts that are throbbing and that are...
You know, he has these very memorable lines about, you know, what ordinary people are like.
And he captures that.
And he gives them a story of displaced people, Evangeline and her lover, basically embodying a sense of insecurity that he felt most people also felt.
You know what I love about that?
And you have it in your book and others touch on it.
And it goes back to what you're saying, not only about narrative and story, but, you know, I'm a journalist, basically, and I write books that thrive on storytelling.
And he's sitting around, and he hears this story that Hawthorne hears about first.
Hawthorne is not interested in it.
And he says, well, maybe I can use it.
Because he sees the story in it.
And Hawthorne, I think, later was very rueful about it,
Why didn't I do that?
But he saw the possibilities of the storytelling.
I don't know if you have his biography.
I do, in fact, and I've read it.
He has a very funny little aside on what would have happened to the story that happened and the fourth one had written it.
Well, that's what I was just actually picking on, actually drawing on.
I mean, I said that because I do have that book, in fact.
So was his celebrity a phenomenon, do you think?
I mean, he is the first great superstar.
Yeah.
Well, it also came from something else, I suppose, that in a sense made him, for me, a much more American writer than some of the...
While at the same time he was the most European of all American writers, in another sense he was very American in that he thought of literature as a civic obligation, as something that a celebrity for him was not, you know, just stardom that came without any strings attached.
It came with an obligation to handle his celebrity well and to be accessible to the people he wrote for.
Well, how did he account for that accessibility?
Answering letters that he got.
So he did.
So he did the correspondence.
To an extent that... Because he didn't do the lectures as so many others did.
Yeah.
And to an extent that baffles people.
Whittier at one point said in one of his letters that he thinks the letters that Longfield received finally killed him at the end.
Whittier says this?
Yes.
I think I have that reference.
If my index is correct, you might be able to find it.
But in a letter written after Longfiller's death, Whittier, of course, was very frail at that time himself and was suffering from a similar sort of assault on his privacy.
People fighting him, trying to, and his problem was different because he was actually...
probably be vocal about all sorts of causes and people wanted to enlist him.
But Longfellow would respond even to the most senseless queries.
Well, you have the letter from the little girl in Ohio.
Exactly.
Which is wonderful.
And he answers her with a well, beautifully written letter.
Exactly, yes.
Quotable.
Perfectly, in fact.
And that is something I actually... It became clear to me that even...
It wasn't even clear to me when I wrote the book, when I was at Bowdoin, and I looked at some of what these young men were required to do in college, and how many of them, in the class of 1825 especially, ended up fulfilling public functions of some sort in Maine or elsewhere as lawyers and that
as representatives and so on.
Longfellow was part of a culture that, you know, implanted in him the idea that you give back what you receive and you do this in a didactic way, which is something also that marks his poetry and mars his poetry in the minds of many people who don't like him.
But there was also a sense that you do what you do because...
You have to, and you do it in such a sense that you are accountable for what you do.
There's this beautiful story, which I think I mentioned in my book, just about the time that Evangelion had come out, when he goes to Cambridge and he buys a pair of shoes, and the clerk says to him, Mr. Longfellow, you're going to get some of that money back later today when I'm going to buy myself a copy of your poem.
And he liked that idea.
that this is sort of an exchange of goods in a sense, which also doesn't mean that literature is just a product.
It means that you work on it.
It means that you do your best and that you don't release something that doesn't fulfill certain criteria for craftsmanship, which is very important.
And something else you point out in your book, and actually you lead with it, but people don't read poetry today, but poetry...
You look at what people had to entertain themselves.
They had story, they had lectures, they had whatever.
These poems, they were best sellers.
He even kept count of his own sales.
Very carefully.
He got the plates to his own books.
It was amazing.
He had a business sense, didn't he?
An entrepreneurial sense, perhaps, even?
Or a sense of his own value, monetary as well as cultural?
I don't know.
Yeah.
I think, you know, one thing you always have to remember, too, is that he married the daughter of the Richard Campbell, Massachusetts.
And while the Harvard professor was not a nobody,
He was certainly not, you know, had the same social standing as Fanny Allen.
Well, I don't know how many professors anywhere could move into the Craigley Mansion, you know, on Brattle Street.
That's for sure.
You also have to remember that most of the writers around him did have daytime jobs that they held on to.
And Longfellow originally wanted to be a poet, and he told his father.
Well, that letter to his father is extraordinary, which I will quote on my piece, by the way.
You will be richly cited, by the way.
It's an extraordinary letter.
It's right there.
He says what matters to him in life.
It's a passage I did not quote in my book, which is extraordinarily moving.
after his father's death, it's not in the published diaries, he goes back to Portland to clean up, well, basically to clean up his father's things, and there's a moment where he looks at his father's papers, he looks at his writing desk, and he just can't, I think he says, I don't remember the exact words, but
How depressing.
A small-time lawyer's life.
The many petty affairs.
He sees before, and this could have been his fate.
His father wanted him to be a lawyer like he was one.
And there is the specter of mediocrity that he escaped, but he still was a guy from Portland.
In Cambridge.
Well, he probably should have gone to Harvard, actually.
I mean, I went to Bates up in Maine, by the way.
But Bowdoin back in the, whenever he went there, Bates wasn't even in existence then.
I mean, with his pedigree, I guess it was monetary as well.
But I mean, I think it should have been at Harvard.
I think there was also a little bit the idea that Bowden is a place where young men can be kept safe and away from the temptation.
If you read Hawthorne's first novel, terrible novel, which is no longer really accessible, he writes about the temptation that college students are exposed to and Fanshawe.
Which is, you know, from a bibliographical point, it's very, or the point of a bibliophile is very interesting, too, because it's so rare.
What's the title of that one?
Fanshawe.
He had all copies except two or three, I guess, burned, because he was so embarrassed by it.
And, of course, it was reissued and so on.
And he writes about the temptations that one is exposed to, and there's...
There's a guy that, you know, falls for everything that one can possibly fall for, including drink.
So it's a memorable book because it's one of the first, I think, descriptions of a hangover in American literature.
Now, something to interrupt here briefly.
I know you've got your children there.
You don't want to spend the night talking to me.
But I certainly do want to make mention of your Houghton exhibition.
And thank you, by the way, for sending that description.
It's excellent.
What are you trying to accomplish in this exhibition?
The basic idea is to challenge the image of Longfellow as a sort of stuffy Victorian and to point out, A, that as a writer he was driven by a sense of extreme professionalism and that he was... and also...
by a sense of duty, as I tried to explain earlier.
So the readers and fans are part of that first goal.
And the second goal is to also show that a kind of lighter side of him in his private, personal life, which involves, you know, the interactions, especially with the children, that are very interesting from
even a social history point of view because he was what we would probably refer to today a new man, somebody who, as opposed to a new woman, somebody who took his obligations as a father very, very seriously and was incredibly available to his children.
In a sense, in a way that was unusual for the time.
So I'm going actually off in two different directions.
I want to sort of reinvent him as a professional poet on the one hand and also emphasize how modern he was in the ways in which he arranged his personal life.
These are the two goals that I want to combine.
Will we get a sense of his celebrity?
Yes, because there's a whole case devoted to a fan letter.
And, of course, you have the jug there and a few other things, which are wonderful, aren't they?
The cigar wrappers and stuff.
Yeah, yeah.
Extraordinarily, I think that quote from Queen Victoria, who certainly knew who he was, but she was so astonished that the servants knew who he was.
That's exactly right.
And that's what I meant when I said earlier, sort of the distinct human taste and appetite breaks down in this work, you know, because there's the servants reading him.
I also have a letter by Anderson, Hans Christian Andersen.
You have that.
I enjoy that.
He liked Anderson, and Anderson liked him.
There's much more, apparently, because I started corresponding with somebody at the Anderson Center in Copenhagen, and there are Longfellow letters that she's been trying to track down for me, apparently.
in several collections in Denmark, some of which this person thinks are written in Danish.
Oh, that would be, well, he could do it.
If anyone could, he could.
It would be very interesting.
Certainly, and he maintained a lifelong interest in Andersen, not just because he read the stories to his children, but because he had a shared love of Italy, which impressed Longfellow, even though
He said that Anderson knew far less than he did, which, you know... You know, apparently Dickens came to spend a Thanksgiving dinner with him.
Yeah.
And I wonder, is there any record of that?
You talk about, you had a meeting there, the breaking of bread.
on the other side of the Atlantic, arguably the most celebrated man over there, and the most celebrated figure over here, getting together at Thanksgiving.
Would you love to know what was discussed at that dinner?
Is there any sort of a journal record of that that I could find, do you think?
Annie Fields has written about Dickens and Longfellow.
I don't think there is...
The diaries talked much about words that were being... And Longfellow didn't really share much about his thoughts, did he?
No, no.
That's a problem, isn't it?
His diaries are very focused on external things.
Who came, who left, what was eaten, but not much about what was dead.
In his reading last time, we know what he read, but we know very little about... Yeah.
If you go by the reading list, you know, what the hell did you think about it?
There's one way of, you know, finding out about this when it comes to books about Italy and Dante because a lot of these were mined for his notes, for his translation.
And you see, and in some of these notes he's actually a little more
scholarly than you do find him combining things, evaluating, quoting, and so on.
But he'd pretty much given up writing essays at that point.
Actually, really after the 1840s, there's no critical commentary from him anymore, except sometimes in letters.
So it's very hard to assess
um, how he responded to, uh, to books he, he read.
And sometimes it's very disappointing.
And, uh, there's a, there's a quote I, I sometimes use and, uh, in class, um, when he, um, visited Hawthorne once and, uh,
Hawthorne was very depressed about his lack of popularity and his weary and everything else.
And he said to Longfellow, apparently, I shall write no more tales.
And Longfellow says, and that he records in his diary, I advise him to write up 100 in all and then give them a good round title such as,
The Hundred Tales, or Century of Tales.
Do you know what the heck he was doing?
Let them go with that.
You know, there's a book coming from Yale in a couple months, and I'm doing a book for Yale, so they gave me a reader's copy, but it's Walt Whitman and the Culture of American Celebrity.
I heard about that.
And it's pretty good.
That's David, even Blake.
Yeah.
And, of course, he does have a long... He says, you know, flat out in there that Longfellow is the guy, and everybody else is...
you know, this is Mount Everest and everything else is, you know, just in the Himalayan range.
But apparently it really bothered Whitman, who so craved celebrity, that what do I have to do to get up there?
Does he also write about Whitman keeping the stamp?
Yes, he does.
What does he make of that?
He doesn't get into it in any great detail.
I think it's just wonderful.
He really gets into the butterfly image, you know, which I've spent too much time on.
But it's a nice little thing.
I'm talking, I'm not sure how much of it is accurate, but Peter Corviello, who...
co-taught the seminar at Bowdoin with me.
He was a Whitman expert.
He said Whitman would even be concerned about, you know, how his virility would come across in photographs and pose and repose himself.
Well, Longfellow really loved the photograph, didn't he?
The daguerreotype.
Yeah, yeah.
It is interesting as I've up to Whitman.
Whitman was questioned directly, in fact, on a couple of occasions about at least 48 years, too.
Yeah, yeah.
But apparently, I mean, not to become too graphic, but I heard a paper from someone who actually said that Whitman was, you know, concerned about how his privates would come across.
You mean his actual privates?
And asked for
knew for repositioning that would, you know, help him in that quest.
This is a guy working at Iowa and apparently has been comparing different versions of photographs and which is part of that whole celebrity issue, I suppose.
Very, very interesting, though.
There's also this wonderful meeting between Longfin and Whitman, which I'm sure you talked about, where
Whitman was a little put off by how Shaman and Longfellow seemed like a lady, like somebody who'd been dressed by his wife.
That's in there.
But celebrity, it's a phenomenon that is just emerging at that time, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
And Mark Twain certainly becomes identified by his white suit, almost in a tumble kind of a way.
I know the Mainest York Society is trying to do a little workshop about fame and longfilling.
Yeah, well, they see something today, and I told them, I said, look, I'd love to help you, and I'll do what I can, but I'm not a scholar here.
I gave your name to them.
And I had a conversation with the guy, and I said, whatever I can do to help, but I don't see...
what I could contribute to the discourse.
I talk to people like Christoph.
I don't do the work that they do.
I think you would have been great for that.
I watched Alan Trachtenberg, who is a great scholar, come to Greece a little bit last year.
He was talking about his new book, Shades of Here or Other, which is about the interest in Native Americans.
myths and how, you know, different ethnic groups were using them to represent themselves.
And these guys, you know, people who attend these seminars, they are Longfellow fans.
They're fanatical.
They're local.
They're local people.
And they wanted to know whether Trachtenberg really likes Longfellow.
And he said, well, I don't know.
One lady said, you wrote a book about him.
Do you like it?
Or do you think it's dangerous stuff?
Wow.
And he said, well, I think it's done a lot of damage.
And then somebody else said, what do you mean by damage?
And then he said, well, it's sort of... And he really couldn't say why he felt it was harmful.
And they were very sharp, and I like Alan a lot, and I like his book, but he clearly wasn't able to step out of this academic framework and confront people who have a passion for reading and who'd come to this because they wanted to know, and they wanted to know what he thought about this.
And somebody said, well, Professor, just tell us, would you sit down and pick up Longfellow at night and read him?
And he said, no.
Well, would you?
I do, actually.
I have my favorites.
I have poems that I return to.
I think there are some poems that have a great deal of personal significance for me.
Some of the later poems, especially, he writes about aging, like no other poet, really, including Ritman.
And I find him very compelling when he writes about...
One poem I keep coming back to, and that's the elegy he wrote for Hawthorne, which I think is just wonderful.
It's simply called Hawthorne.
It's a poem written to commemorate his funeral, and it's one of his most beautiful poems, I think.
And even in that poem, there's a reference to Aladdin.
So he always takes you a little bit out of the cultural framework that you're used to.
And he sent this poem, which I think is very, very significant, you know, when you try to understand him.
He sent it to Fields, James Fields, after the funeral.
And he said, this is what I wrote, Did you not feel so likewise?
Mm-hmm.
And that's sort of the idea that drives this poetry.
It's not really something that we're used to applying to poetry.
You know, that it's about feelings that we share.
When you read, by contrast, the poem that Melville wrote for Hawthorne, so most people think it was Hawthorne, you were talking about it, it's simply called Monody.
And it's just, it's naked despair in the poem, and it's
Never its own despair about having lost thoughts on.
It's nothing about feelings that can be shared by all people who have feelings.
It's about my own despair, which is much more accessible to people who come out of this modernist idea of what literature is supposed to accomplish.
I think, at least.
And, you know, it kind of forces us to sort of step back a little bit and think about literature differently.
So do you think the modernist view continues to hold sway?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And it's not much likelihood that Longfellow will make any kind of a recovery, you think?
Or will he continue to be this marginal figure?
I don't see much of a chance in English department context, really.
Simply because the very idea that literary history is something that's always about the kind of idea that we have to make it new is so ingrained in the heads of
In what we've been taught, that we cannot, that we have no room for a poet who looks at the past and recycles it in his work and reuses what he finds elsewhere, as he did, you know, you mentioned the Evangeline story and so on.
This is not something that we are used to.
We are much more comfortable with somebody like Whitman or Pound or
and it's very interesting that in spite of the many critical schools and the many sort of theoretical turns that the academy has gone through, we still hold on to the idea that this is how literature has to work.
I think that there is a chance for recovering a little bit
in schools, which is one of the reasons why I was so happy when I was invited to do this NEH seminar.
Longfellow poems can be taught very well if you move away from the memorization thing and so on, because poems are well made.
And you can talk about them in very accessible, very interesting terms.
Even a poem like The Rite of Paul Revere, which has been read so much and taught so much, you can approach it very simply as a sort of, here's the story that Longfellow wants to tell, and the aesthetic challenge is the story that takes place at night.
How do you write a poem about something that happens at night?
That is a challenge.
It is.
How do you do it?
And then you can look at how he represents sound, how he works with sound, how, you know, the hoof tabs or whatever, how he works with light and so on.
And you see all of a sudden that this is a really interestingly made, well-made poem.
It's not a poem that you have to step back and revere, no pun intended.
But it's a poem that...
that is just a good, well-made object that can teach you something about how you yourself should approach your own writing.
And there is a chance for recovery that I think is very real.
And the echo that we had from the 35 to 40 school teachers who attended our seminar, I think, proved me right.
And
And there, I think, is a real opportunity for us to get back to Longfellow.
And the other opportunity, of course, and this is even something that might happen in the academy as well, if that is important at all.
I still think that it's more important what readers out there think.
The kind of transnational angle, the international angle, to me is very important.
And more important today than ever before, because
Here's a writer who thinks about the world not in terms of the superiority of the Anglican mentality and race, which is something that even Whitman and Mel would subscribe to, but thinks about it in terms of shared cultural interests.
Any change of interest, even which is why translation was so important to him.
So, let me just, because I've taken up a full hour of your time here, Richard, I'm interested in what you feel when you walk into the Longfellow House over there on Brattle Street.
You talk about a place giving you some sense of the person there.
Yeah.
Is that anything at all that resonates with you?
Well, the first thing I look at is books, of course.
And I see books everywhere.
And that for me is... Four thousand books there, I think, of his.
Right.
And that is a feeling, an instant feeling of at-homeness when I walk into that place.
Because here is somebody who surrounds himself with books and who cannot have enough of them.
And...
For me, that's the most powerful sort of rapport that I have with him.
I like his study.
What I find very interesting, there's a famous photograph of Longfellow sitting, he seems kind of asleep, next to his desk.
He went to get a statuette there, right?
Yes.
I like the fact that it's a round desk that he uses.
It's not one of those traditional, you know, writing desks.
It's almost like something you would find in a parlor, which shows again sort of how these two things come together, you know, writing as a profession, but also something that, you know, other people can do and relate to.
So it's both something that I do very well, but something also that I, you know, share with people other than me who might not be writers
There's something, you know, demonic about that as far as I'm concerned.
I like the study very much because it's a workplace for him, but it's also a place where you still feel the presence of the family.
And that brings together the two things that I want to explore in my exhibition to, you know, the workmanlike aspect of his work, and yet...
the familiarity that it also has, literally.
I like that very much.
It's inseparable.
The whole thing is inseparable for me, at least, from the work that people like Jimmy Fay and others are doing, who've made that house a hospitable and open place.
It's wonderful.
Like few other places I've experienced.
They are...
extremely dedicated people, all of them, Paul Blanford, Nancy Jones, Anita Israel, Jim Shea, but they also constantly think about ways of getting more people to become involved in the House with a dedication that I've never seen anywhere.
and Jim Shea is a scholar in his own right.
Yeah, he's terrific, actually.
He was the one that got me interested in this, by the way.
Yeah, yeah.
Listen, I'm going to let you go, Professor.
Don't call me that.
Okay.
What I will suggest is why don't I get back in touch with you after I've had a chance to go through this tape, work on the piece, and I'd be more than happy to run your quotes by anything that I use so you can have a chance to...
Maybe amend them or whatever you'd like to do with them.
Oh, sure.
I'm sure.
Well, you know, I'd like to get it right, too.
Yeah.
But feel free to call.